Feat: Otel docs (#356)
posit-dev/py-shiny-site: docs/opentelemetry/_quick-start.qmd

## Quick Start

### Basic Configuration

[Pydantic Logfire](https://logfire.pydantic.dev/) provides zero-configuration OpenTelemetry setup with a managed observability platform. You will need to set up a Logfire account and project. On your first run of logfire, it will ask you to authenticate and choose which project your metrics will be associated with.

::: {.panel-tabset}

## pip

```bash
pip install logfire
logfire auth
```

## uv

```bash
uv add logfire
uv run logfire auth
```

:::

::: {.callout-tip collapse="true"}
## Test your Logfire setup with a simple app

```python
import logfire
import os

# Optional: Configure Logfire if you haven't already (prompts for auth on first run)

> # logfire.configure()

Reviewer: If this can be done via the CLI I think that would flow better (right now, I would ask myself why is this commented out?)

Author: Unfortunately it can't be done via CLI, only auth can. However, I think this is clearer in the split tab version with some other updates.

from shiny import App, ui, render
os.environ["SHINY_OTEL_COLLECT"] = "reactivity"

# Use Shiny normally - tracing happens automatically
app_ui = ui.page_fluid(
    ui.input_slider("n", "N", 1, 100, 50),
    ui.output_text("result")
)

def server(input, output, session):
    @render.text
    def result():
        return f"You selected: {input.n()}"

app = App(app_ui, server)
```

:::

View traces at [logfire.pydantic.dev](https://logfire.pydantic.dev/) - you'll see session spans, reactive updates, and individual reactive executions with SQL-queryable data.

See the [Logfire documentation](https://logfire.pydantic.dev/) for more details on querying, alerts, and dashboards.

::: {.callout-tip collapse="true"}
## Debugging with the console exporter

For local debugging without an observability backend, you can configure OpenTelemetry to print spans to the console.

You will need to install the OpenTelemetry SDK to be able to print to the console.

::: {.panel-tabset}

## pip

```bash
# Option 1: Install with Shiny's optional dependencies
pip install "shiny[otel]"

# Option 2: Install the SDK manually
pip install opentelemetry-sdk opentelemetry-exporter-otlp

> ```

Reviewer: Consider bringin this up to be right after the `pip install logfire` portion. Explain that installing logfire essentially gives to the relevant otel extras, but if you don't want to use logfire, you'll need to install the extras.

Author: Reconfigured this with the two tab option so it's clearer.

## uv

```bash
# Option 1: Install with Shiny's optional dependencies
uv add "shiny[otel]"

# Option 2: Install the SDK manually
uv add opentelemetry-sdk opentelemetry-exporter-otlp
```

:::

```python
# Configure before importing shiny (or after - late init supported)
from opentelemetry import trace
from opentelemetry.sdk.trace import TracerProvider
from opentelemetry.sdk.trace.export import ConsoleSpanExporter, SimpleSpanProcessor

provider = TracerProvider()
provider.add_span_processor(SimpleSpanProcessor(ConsoleSpanExporter()))
trace.set_tracer_provider(provider)

# Import and use Shiny normally

> from shiny import App, ui

Reviewer: I think part of what is making this section hard for me to follow is that we're trying to cover two approaches: Logfire and console based reporting. Let's consider putting the two different approaches in two top-level `.tabset`, so you can "choose your own adventure" with the basic usage.

Author: Agree, I like this strategy. I think OTel is more compelling with a backend, but some folks might not want to do that and the self-hosted options are more complicated than we can cover easily here.

```

:::

#### Set Collection Level
```bash
# Environment variable (app-wide default)
export SHINY_OTEL_COLLECT=session
```

> 

Reviewer: This section needs more explaining (or short summary+link) to learn more about what a collection level is

::: {.callout-tip collapse="true"}
## Extract setup logic into a configuration module

To keep your app efficient, it's helpful to move OpenTelemetry setup into a dedicated module. This keeps your app files clean and ensures configuration (environment variables, Logfire, AI instrumentation) is applied consistently before Shiny imports.

```python

{{< include apps/opentelemetry/configure.py >}}

```

Then in each app file, call it before importing Shiny:

```python
from configure import configure

> configure()

Reviewer: Let's change this to just `import otel_config` and have that perform the configuration side effects

app_ui = ui.page_fluid(
    ui.input_slider("n", "N", 1, 100, 50),
    ui.output_text("result")
)

def server(input, output, session):
    @render.text
    def result():
        return f"You selected: {input.n()}"

app = App(app_ui, server)
```

:::

View traces at [logfire.pydantic.dev](https://logfire.pydantic.dev/) - you'll see session spans, reactive updates, and individual reactive executions with SQL-queryable data.

See the [Logfire documentation](https://logfire.pydantic.dev/) for more details on querying, alerts, and dashboards.

:::

#### Extract setup logic into a configuration module

To keep your app efficient, it's helpful to move OpenTelemetry setup into a dedicated module. This keeps your app files clean and ensures configuration (environment variables, Logfire, AI instrumentation) is applied consistently before Shiny imports.

You'll notice our `otel_config` module includes setting `SHINY_OTEL_COLLECT`. This variable controls how much detail is captured and defaults to `"all"`.

You may want to reduce or refine your own collection level. Se the portion on [collection levels](#what-can-shiny-record) for more information.

> ```python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```{.python filename="otel_config.py"}
```

## Quick Start

### Shiny Otel Installation

> OpenTelemetry support is built into Shiny, but you need to install the OpenTelemetry SDK to enable it:

Reviewer 2: Something to the effect of....

```suggestion
OpenTelemetry support is built into Shiny, but you need to install the OpenTelemetry SDK to be able to print to the console. Packages like `logfire` will automatically install this for you.
```

Reviewer 2: Applied suggestion.

# pip install "shiny[otel]"

# 2. Configure before importing shiny (or after - late init supported)
from opentelemetry import trace
from opentelemetry.sdk.trace import TracerProvider
from opentelemetry.sdk.trace.export import ConsoleSpanExporter, SimpleSpanProcessor

provider = TracerProvider()
provider.add_span_processor(SimpleSpanProcessor(ConsoleSpanExporter()))
trace.set_tracer_provider(provider)

# 3. Import and use Shiny normally
from shiny import App, ui
```

#### Set Collection Level
```bash
# Environment variable (app-wide default)
export SHINY_OTEL_COLLECT=session
```

::: {.callout-note collapse="true"}
## Optional: Quick Setup with Logfire

[Pydantic Logfire](https://logfire.pydantic.dev/) provides zero-configuration OpenTelemetry setup with a managed observability platform.

### Installation and Setup

You will need to set up a Logfire account and project. On your first run of logfire, it will ask you to authenticate and choose which project your metrics will be associated with.

::: {.panel-tabset}

## pip

```bash
pip install logfire
logfire auth
```

## uv

```bash
uv add logfire
uv run logfire auth
```

> :::

Reviewer 2: Please swap this logfire setup as the main setup. Put the console setup as the "btw... you can debug using this". 

Having it first matches the earlier: "Throughout this article, you’ll see examples of OTel traces visualized in Logfire"

Reviewer 2: Logfire is now the primary setup. The console exporter config has been moved into a collapsed "Debugging with the console exporter" callout.

```python
import logfire
import os

# Optional: Configure Logfire if you haven't already (prompts for auth on first run)
# logfire.configure()

# Import Shiny and set collection level
from shiny import App, ui, render
os.environ["SHINY_OTEL_COLLECT"] = "reactivity"

# Use Shiny normally - tracing happens automatically
app_ui = ui.page_fluid(
    ui.input_slider("n", "N", 1, 100, 50),
    ui.output_text("result")
)

def server(input, output, session):
    @render.text
    def result():
        return f"You selected: {input.n()}"

app = App(app_ui, server)
```

:::

View traces at [logfire.pydantic.dev](https://logfire.pydantic.dev/) - you'll see session spans, reactive updates, and individual reactive executions with SQL-queryable data.

See the [Logfire documentation](https://logfire.pydantic.dev/) for more details on querying, alerts, and dashboards.

:::

::: {.callout-tip}
## Verifying OTel setup

To verify your OpenTelemetry setup is working, use `is_otel_tracing_enabled()`:

```python
from shiny.otel._core import is_otel_tracing_enabled

print(f"Tracing enabled: {is_otel_tracing_enabled()}")
# Should print: Tracing enabled: True
```

> :::

Reviewer 2: I believe we should remove this section as it uses an internal method.

So we remove it, or we export the method. Your choice

Reviewer 2: Removed the entire "Verifying OTel setup" callout.

Reviewer 2: Removed the entire "Verifying OTel setup" callout.
